## Käännettäväksi ##

several studies (e.g. Wolfe
et al. 1982, Carraro et al. 1994) have shown that the whole body protein
breakdown, indicated by the increase in LEU oxidation, is increased during
aerobic endurance exercise. This results from a need for amino acids to be
oxidised in working muscles. However, urea production is not elevated during
exercise, even though it reflects protein breakdown (Wolfe et al. 1982). Carraro
et al. (1994) showed that the increased nitrogen flux is incorporated in acute
phase plasma protein synthesis, which are available for later protein synthesis
during recovery. The exercise induced increase in ALA (and thus in nitrogen)
seen during and following endurance exercise may be partially incorporated in
acute phase plasma protein synthesis rather than in urea (Carraro et al. 1990a).
Whole body protein synthesis has been reported to be either decreased (Wolfe
et al. 1982) or unchanged (Carraro et al. 1990a) immediately following
endurance exercise.

The concentration of total free amino acids
have been reported to be lower, except TYR, which increased during heavy
exercise of long duration (Haralambie and Berg 1976). Blomstrand et al. (1996)
have reported significant decreases in plasma TRP and LEU concentrations
following an 80-minute exercise session to exhaustion. In a study of Strüder et
al. (1995) decreases were observed in 11 out of 14 amino acids after a 4-hour
tennis tournament. Moreover, endurance exercise results in changes in
intramuscular concentrations of amino acids: GLU decreases rapidly within the
first minutes of exercise and then plateaus (Sahlin et al. 1990). In contrast ALA
release increases during the initial period of exercise and then returns to resting
level. Sustained level of GLN from muscle is also associated with prolonged
exercise (MacLean et al. 1994). The decrease of GLN, which plays an important
role in immune system, may be a factor in the high incidence of infections in
athletes due to apparent immunosuppression (Castell and Newsholme 1998).


