## Käännettäväksi ##

The essential branched chain amino acid LEU amounts to about 4.6% of all
amino acids (Takala et al. 1980) and it accounts for many important roles in the
body. It regulates protein metabolism by inhibiting degradation and
stimulating synthesis (Nair et al. 1992), and supplies glycogenic precursors for
the formation of ALA in muscle (Brooks 1987). LEU is interesting, since it can be
oxidized in muscle in a higher rate than the other BCAAs, VAL and ILE, to
asetylCoA (Wagenmakers 1998).

Under catabolic conditions (for
example fasting) the BCAAs are oxidised at increased rate suggesting that they
serve as energy sources for muscle (Goldberg and Odessey 1972). Henderson et
al. (1985) showed increased LEU oxidation in rats by both training and
treadmill exercise. A significant decrease of 22% has been shown to occur
following aerobic exercise in serum LEU level (Bergström et al. 1985) and in
vastus lateralis muscle with reduced muscle glycogen stores (Blomstrand et al.
1996). Young and Bier (1987) have presented that the LEU requirement for
adults is 14 mg/kg body weight /day, but it should be increased to 30
mg/kg/day in individuals who regularly participate in endurance type
physical activities, since the recommended dietary intake of LEU is lower than
measured whole body rates of LEU oxidation (Hood and Terjung 1990).

The
modulation of whole body protein by variation of dietary protein has been
investigated by Bowtell et al. (1998). They found that LEU oxidation was
increased by previous ingestion of a high protein diet due to increased LEU
availability. Exogenous amino acids have also been shown to stimulate net
muscle protein synthesis in the elderly as well as in the young (Volpi et al.
1999).

A low
dose LEU supplementation had no effect on either blood or muscle lactate
accumulation during exercise and the performance was not improved during
intense exercise (Vukovich et al. 1997). However, LEU (270 mg) has been shown
to stimulate muscle protein synthesis following exercise and further enhance
post-exercise muscle recovery in rats (Anthony et al. 1999).

It has been
suggested that a mixture of BCAAs could improve both mental and physical
performance and have a sparing effect on muscle glycogen degradation during 
endurance exercise with low glycogen stores (Blomstrand and Newsholme
1992, Blomstrand et al. 1996), but there is only limited data concerning LEU
supplementation alone (Mero 1999). 
